title: Atoms
course: Articles
author: Jamie

Atom
====

Atoms are like the building blocks of the Universe. Almost everything in
the world is made up of atoms, from simple objects like chairs and
tables, to complicated objects like human beings. However, they are
very, very small, so lots of them must be joined together to make
everyday objects.

Structure
---------

Atoms are made up of three types of particles: protons, neutrons and
electrons. The protons and neutrons are clumped together in the centre
of the atom, in a region called the nucleus. The electrons orbit this
nucleus, much like the planets orbit the Sun. Electrons are negatively
charged, protons are positively charged, and neutrons are neutral (no
charge). Opposite charges attract (see Electricity), so the protons in
the nucleus attract the electrons, which is what stops them flying off
into space.

An atom overall must be neutral, which means that all the charges that
exist within it must cancel out. It turns out that the amount of charge
that an electron has is equal, but opposite, to the amount of charge
that a proton has. Therefore, an atom must have an equal amount of
protons and electrons for this cancellation to happen.

Types of Atom
-------------

![An unrelated abstract atom symbol](atom.svg)

The different types of atoms are called elements. There are lots of
common, everyday elements like Oxygen, Iron and Carbon, alongside rarer
ones like Uranium. The element, i.e. the type of atom, is defined by the
number of protons it has in its nucleus. For example, if an atom has 8
protons it is called Oxygen, if it has 26 it is called Iron, and if it
has 6 it is called Carbon.

In reality it is not that common to get objects that are made up solely
of a single element, they are more commonly made of compounds. These
compounds are simply groups of atoms joined together, and include common
materials like carbon dioxide (CO~2~) or water (H~2~O).

See Also
--------

- [Quarks](quark-1)
 - [States of Matter](article.php?article_name=StatesofMatter)

